---
published: true
title: PCIe interface
tags: pc
---
## [What is PCIe?](https://www.overclock.net/forum/355-ssd/1489684-ssd-interface-comparison-pci-express-vs-sata.html)

Peripheral Component Interconnect Express, or PCIe, is a physical interconnect for motherboard expansion. Normally this is the connector slot you plug your graphics card, network card, sound card, or for storage purposes, a RAID card into. PCIe was designed to replace the older PCI, PCI-X, and AGP bus standards and to allow for more flexibility for expansion. Improvements include higher maximum bandwidth, lower I/O pin count and smaller physical footprint, better performance-scaling, more detailed error detection and reporting, and hot-plugging. The physical connector on the motherboard typically allows for up to 16 lanes for data transfer. A PCIe device that is an x4 device can fit into a PCIe x4 slot up to an x16 slot and still function. PCIe 1.0 allowed for 250MB/s per lane, PCIe 2.0 allows for 500MB/s per lane and the newest PCIe 3.0 allows for 1GB/s per lane.

**M.2** - Well now that you know what PCIe, SATA, and the different interconnects are, let us go into the new M.2 form factor. I am mentioning the M.2 standard because the Plextor M6e we have for testing is simply a M.2 SSD connected to a PCIe adapter. The M.2 standard is an improved revision of the mSATA connector design. It allows for more flexibility in the manufacturing of not only SSDs, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, satellite navigation, near field communication (NFC), digital radio, Wireless Gigabit Alliance (WiGig), and wireless WAN (WWAN).
